# GDC Data Portal Release 0.2.15-oicr4 (October 1st, 2015)

## New Features and Changes

*   n/a

## Bugs Fixed Since Last Release

*   Data access and subtype units are correct in the data download statistics report
*   Improved 508 compliance of the portal (including the data download statistics report)
*   Addressed an issue with the user getting an empty page in specific browsing situations
*   "My projects" filter has been re-enabled for users authenticated with eRACommons but without dbGap authorization.

## Known Issues and Workarounds

*   Missing pathology files and slide images for some TCGA datasets since they are not connected to the biospecimen chain yet
*   In some specific situation (complex queries using must_not term), the advanced search might returns incorrect results
*   When exporting the annotation table to a file, the create date field is not displayed in the same format than the UI
*   In the advanced search, adding a trailing space to the query causes the UI to display a syntax error although the query is valid
*   Checksum missing for MAGE-TAB files
*   User can download large files (> 1GB) from the Portal but it fails when extracting the tar.gz file. User should use the GDC Download Transfer Tool for large downloads
*   Authenticated user with access to TARGET projects cannot download Target DCC files. They will get a pop-up message.
*   In Case Entity Page, the “Download Clinical XML" button is not applicable to TARGET projects. The label is incorrect but the functionality is accurate.
*   The advanced search suggests more fields than expected (e.g. "cases.aliquots" should not be displayed). User should remove the field from the query and use the long field name (e.g. "cases.samples.portions.analytes.aliquots")
*   If a user has previously logged into the Portal and left a session without logging out, if he comes back to the Portal after his sessionID expires, it looks like the user is still authenticated. The user cannot download the token and gets an error message that would not close. The user should clear the cache to properly log out. 
*   Sorting on size and removing files from cart does not work in IE 10
*   Annotations page not section 508 compliant
*   Facets are displayed above the results table when window is small
*   Table sorting icon does not include numbers

Release details are maintained in the [GDC Data Portal Change Log](https://github.com/NCI-GDC/portal-ui/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).
