# GDC Data Portal Release 0.2.15-oicr2 (August 31, 2015)

## New Features and Changes

*   Authentication, Authorization & Pop-up messages:
    *   If a user tries to download a related file that is controlled from the File Entity Page, he will get a pop-up message with appropriate guidance (“Login" or “No access to the file")
    *   If a user tries to download a controlled clinical file from the Case page, he will get a pop-up message to indicate that he does not have access to the file
    *   If a user authenticates to the Portal with an eRa account without dbGap authorization, he will get a warning message. Then he will have the choice to logout or to continue browsing the Portal with his eRa account. If he continues browsing the Portal with his eRa account, "My projects" filter will be hidden (temporary solution).
*   If User downloads large files (from the Cart or from the File table), the Portal displays a spinner to indicate the download is in progress
*   Data Download Report does not show the "Data Level" section anymore.

## Bugs Fixed Since Last Release

*   The add to Cart button in File Entity Page changes its display value following a click. User can then click on “Remove from Cart”
*   Total Case value in the Cart matches with the number of cases associated with the files in the Cart
*   When User is authenticated, "My project flag" in Case table indicates that the Cases belongs to his projects
*   In Projects table, if User clicks on the count on Files, it links to the Data page - File table
*   In File Entity Page, if there are no associated cases, it will display the message "No Cases Found." instead of "No Participants Found."

## Known Issues and Workarounds

*   Missing pathology files and slide images for some TCGA datasets since they are not connected to the biospecimen chain yet
*   In some specific situation (complex queries using must_not term), the advanced search might returns incorrect results
*   When exporting the annotation table to a file, the create date field is not displayed in the same format than the UI
*   In the advanced search, adding a trailing space to the query causes the UI to display a syntax error although the query is valid
*   Checksum missing for MAGE-TAB files
*   Data download statistics report is not Section 508 compliant
*   User can download large files (> 1GB) from the Portal but it fails when extracting the tar.gz file. User should use the GDC Download Transfer Tool for large downloads
*   Authenticated user with access to TARGET projects cannot download Target DCC files. They will get a pop-up message.
*   In Case Entity Page, the “Download Clinical XML"button is not applicable to TARGET projects. The label is incorrect but the functionality is accurate.
*   The advanced search suggests more fields than expected (e.g. "cases.aliquots" should not be displayed). User should remove the field from the query and use the long field name (e.g. "cases.samples.portions.analytes.aliquots")
*   Removing a filter after paginating table results could cause no results to be displayed. User should press Clear on the filters and start again.
*   If a user has previously logged into the Portal and left a session without logging out, if he comes back to the Portal after his sessionID expires, it looks like the user is still authenticated. The user cannot download the token and gets an error message that would not close. The user should clear the cache to properly log out. 

Release details are maintained in the [GDC Data Portal Change Log](https://github.com/NCI-GDC/portal-ui/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).
