# GDC Data Model

## Introduction

The GDC Data Model is the central method of organization of all data artifacts in the GDC. An overview of the data model, including a visual representation of its components, is provided [on the GDC website](https://gdc.cancer.gov/developers/gdc-data-model). This section provides technical details about its implementation for data users, submitters, and developers.

## Entities, Properties, and Links

Although the GDC Data Model may contain some cyclic elements, it can be helpful to think of it as a [Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) composed of interconnected **entities**. Each entity in the GDC has a set of properties and links.

* **Properties** are key-value pairs associated with an entity. Properties cannot be nested, which means that the value must be numerical, boolean, or a string, and cannot be another key-value set. Properties can be either required or optional. The following properties are of particular importance in constructing the GDC Data Model:
    * **Type** is a required property for all entities. Entity types include `project`, `case`, `demographic`, `sample`, `read_group` and others.
    * **System properties** are properties used in GDC system operation and maintenance. They cannot be modified except under special circumstances.
    * **Unique keys** are properties, or combinations of properties, that can be used to uniquely identify the entity in the GDC. For example, the tuple (combination) of `[ project_id, submitter_id ]` is a unique key for most entities, which means that although `submitter_id` does not need to be unique in GDC, it must be unique within a project. See [GDC Identifiers](#gdc-identifiers) below for details.
* **Links** define relationships between entities, and the multiplicity of those relationships (e.g. one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-many).

The [GDC Data Dictionary](/Data_Dictionary/) determines which properties and links an entity can have according to entity `type`.

Functionally similar entity types are grouped under the same **category**. For example, entity types `slide_image` and `submitted_unaligned_reads` belong to `data_file` category, which comprises entities that represent downloadable files.


## GDC Identifiers

### UUIDs

When an entity is created, it is assigned a unique identifier in the form of a [version 4 universally unique identifier (UUID)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier). The UUID uniquely identifies the entity in the GDC, and is stored in the entity's `id` property.

### Program Name, Project Code, and Project ID

Programs are the highest level of organization of GDC datasets. Each program is assigned a unique `program.name` property. Datasets within a program are organized into projects, and each project is assigned a `project.code` property.

The `project_id` property is associated with most entities in the GDC data model and is generated by appending `project.code` to `program.name` as follows:

	program.name-project.code
	(e.g. TCGA-LAML)

Note that `program.name` never contains hyphens.

### Submitter ID

In addition to UUIDs stored in the `id` property, many entities also have a `submitter_id` property. This property can contain any string that the submitter wishes to use to identify the entity (e.g. a "barcode"). This can be used to identify a corresponding entry in the submitter's records. The GDC requires that `submitter_id` be unique for each entity within a project: the tuple (combination) of `[ project_id, submitter_id ]` is a unique key.

**Note:** The `submitter_id` of a `case` entity corresponds to the `submitted_subject_id` of the study participant in dbGaP records for the project.


## Working with the GDC Data Model

### Data Users

Users can access information stored in the GDC Data Model using the [GDC Data Portal](https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data/gdc-data-portal), the [GDC API](https://gdc.cancer.gov/developers/gdc-application-programming-interface-api), and the [GDC Data Transfer Tool](https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data/gdc-data-transfer-tool). For more information see [Data Access Processes and Tools](https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data/data-access-processes-and-tools).

### Data Submitters

Data submitters can create and update submittable entities in the GDC Data Model and upload data files registered in the model using the [GDC Data Submission Portal](https://gdc.cancer.gov/submit-data/gdc-data-submission-portal), the [GDC API](https://gdc.cancer.gov/developers/gdc-application-programming-interface-api), and the [GDC Data Transfer Tool](https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data/gdc-data-transfer-tool). For more information see [Data Submission Processes and Tools](https://gdc.cancer.gov/submit-data/data-submission-processes-and-tools).
