# Foundation Medicine Adult Dataset (FM-AD) #

## Overview ##

The Foundation Medicine Adult Dataset project was initially harmonized and imported into the Genomic Data Commons with Data Release 9.0 [1].  This project includes data from 18,004 patients, which was produced using the FoundationOne® genomic profiling assay.

## Data

Data from the FM-AD project was generated by harmonizing genomic profiling data to the GRCh38 reference genome and porting it to GDC-compatible formats.  See the Foundation Medicine data page at the GDC website [2] for instructions on downloading the original raw data.  

### Simple Nucleotide Variation

SNV data is available in case-level VCF files and primary-site level MAF files. VCF files are available as raw and annotated VCFs, which are produced from the "FM Simple Somatic Mutation" and "FoundationOne Annotation" workflows respectively. MAF files were produced with the "FoundationOne Variant Aggregation and Masking" workflow. Both of these file types are controlled-access and require dbGaP credentials to access.

### Clinical and Biospecimen Data

Clinical and biospecimen data is available as primary-site level tab-delimited (TSV) files. These files are open-access. Clinical and biospecimen data can also be retrieved in tab-delimited or JSON format by querying the GDC API.  

## References ##
1. [GDC Data Release Notes](https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/Data/Release_Notes/Data_Release_Notes/)
2. [GDC Foundation Medicine Overview](https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-gdc/contributed-genomic-data-cancer-research/foundation-medicine/foundation-medicine)

## External Links ##
* [Foundation Medicine](https://www.foundationmedicine.com/)

Categories: General
